In American football, the National Football League (NFL) collects tracking data via their tracking
system known as Next Gen Stats by having radio frequency identification (RFID) tags installed
into players’ shoulder pads and the football. These high-resolution data, measured at a rate of 10
frames per second, provide positional information for all players on the field (and also the ball).
Along with their player tracking system, the NFL also launched the Big Data Bowl—an annual data
science competition focusing on player tracking data—in 2018 (NFL Football Operations, 2024).
Each year, the NFL Big Data Bowl releases a sample of tracking data to accompany a competition
theme on a specific aspect of American football such as pass coverage, special teams, and linemen
on pass plays. The competition has paved the path for many innovations in football analytics and
subsequently established the foundation for the peer-reviewed literature on statistical analysis of
football tracking data (Lopez, 2020).

. Directly-computed variables such as distance, velocity, acceleration, orientation and
angle for each player (and between players in the case of distance and angle) are quintessential to
developments in player evaluation with tracking data

For our analysis, we use the player tracking data supplied by the NFL Big Data Bowl 2021 (Howard
et al., 2020). The data are recorded at a frequency of 10 Hz (i.e. 10 times a second) and contain
information for every passing play across all 17 weeks of the 2018 NFL regular season. Of primary
interest, the data provide x and y coordinates of players on the field at every frame within each
play. It is worth noting that offensive and defensive linemen information are omitted from the
provided tracking data, resulting in fewer than 22 observed players on the field for each play. The
data also record player attributes at each time step including speed, acceleration, distance traveled
from previous frame, orientation, and angle of motion.